(docs) - Replace "Main Concepts" section with "Architecture" and "Authoring Exchanges" pages (#1418)
FormidableLabs/urql: docs/architecture.md

---
title: Architecture
order: 3
---

# Architecture

`urql` is a highly customizable and flexible GraphQL client, that happens to come with some default
[core behavior in the core package](./core-package.md).

> By default, `urql` aims to provide the minimal amount of features that allow us to build an app
> quickly with minimal configuration. However, `urql` has also been designed to be a GraphQL Client

Reviewer: Would possibly avoid the double "minimal" in same sentence.

```suggestion
By default, `urql` aims to provide the minimal amount of features that allow us to build an app
quickly. However, `urql` has also been designed to be a GraphQL Client
```

that grows with our usage and demands. As we go from building our smallest or first GraphQL apps to
utilising its full functionality, we have tools at our disposal to extend and customize `urql` to
our liking.

## Using GraphQL Clients

You may have worked with a GraphQL API previously and noticed that using GraphQL in your app can be
as straightforward as sending a plain HTTP request with your query to fetch some data.

GraphQL also provides an opportunity to abstract away a lot of the manual work that goes with
sending these queries and managing the data. Ultimately, this lets you focus on building
your app without having to handle the technical details of state management in detail.

Specifically, `urql` simplifies three common aspects of using GraphQL:

- Sending queries and mutations and receiving results _declaratively_
- Abstracting _caching_ and state management internally
- Providing a central point of _extensibility_ and integration with your API

> In the following sections we'll talk about how `urql` solves these three problems, and how this is
> accomplished and abstracted internally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following sections we'll talk about the way that `urql` solves these three problems and how the logic abstracted away internally.
```

## Requests and Operations on the Client

> If `urql` was a train it would take several stops to arrive at its terminus, our API. It starts with us

Reviewer: Amazing analogy

defining queries or mutations. Any GraphQL request can be abstracted into their query documents and
their variables. In `urql`, these GraphQL requests are treated as unique objects which are uniquely

> identified by the query document and variables, which is why a `key` is generated from the two. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identified by the query document and variables (which is why a `key` is generated from the two). This
```

`key` is a hash number of the query document and variables and uniquely identifies our
[`GraphQLRequest`](./api/core.md#graphqlrequest).

> Whenever we'd now like to send a request to our API we start by using `urql`'s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever we decide to send a request to our API we start by using `urql`'s
```

[`Client`](./api/core.md#client). It accepts several options like `url` or `requestPolicy` which are
extra information on how the GraphQL requests are executed.

```js
import { Client } from '@urql/core';

new Client({
  url: '/graphql',
  requestPolicy: 'cache-first',
})
```

The bindings that we've seen in [the "Basics" section](./basics/README.md) interact with [the

> `Client`](./api/core.md#client) directly and are a thin abstraction on top of it, but we've also
> seen some methods that can be called on it directly [on the "Core Usage"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Client`](./api/core.md#client) directly and are a thin abstraction on top of it. Though some methods can be called on it directly, as seen [on the "Core Usage"
```

page](./basics/core.md#one-off-queries-and-mutations).

When we send our queries or mutations to the `Client`, internally they will be managed as
[`Operation`s.](./api/core.md#operation). An "Operation" is an extension of `GraphQLRequest`s. Not
only do they carry the `query`, `variables`, and a `key` property, they will also identify the
`kind` of operation that is executed, like `"query"` or `"mutation"`. We can also find the
`Client`'s options on `operation.context` which carries an operation's metadata.

![Operations and Results](./assets/urql-event-hub.png)

It's the `Client`s responsibility to accept an `Operation` and execute it. The bindings interally
call the `client.executeQuery`, `client.executeMutation`, or `client.executeSubscription` methods
and we'll get a "stream" of results. This "stream" allows us to register a callback with it to
receive results.

In the diagram we can see that each operation is a signal for our request to start at which point
we can expect to receive our results eventually on a callback. Once we're not interested in results
anymore a special "teardown" signal is issued on the `Client`. While we don't see operations outside

> of the `Client` they're what travel through the "Exchanges" on the `Client`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the `Client`, they're what travel through the "Exchanges" on the `Client`.
```

The `Client` itself doesn't actually know what to do with operations. Instead, it sends them through
"exchanges". Exchanges are akin to [middleware in Redux](https://redux.js.org/advanced/middleware)
and have access to all operations and all results. Multiple exchanges are chained to process our
operations and to execute logic on them, one of them being the `fetchExchange`, which as the name
implies sends our requests to our API.

### How operations get to exchanges

We now know how we get to operations and to the `Client`:

- Any bindings or calls to the `Client` create an **operation**
- This operation identifies itself as either a `"query"`, `"mutation"` or `"subscription"` and has a
  unique `key`.
- This operation is sent into the **exchanges** and eventually ends up at the `fetchExchange`
  (or a similar exchange)
- The operation is sent to the API and a **result** comes back which is wrapped in an `OperationResult`
- The `Client` filters the `OperationResult` by the `operation.key` and — via a callback — gives us
  a **stream of results**.

To come back to our train analogy from earlier, an operation, like a train, travels from one end

> of the track to the terminus — our API — the results then come back on the same path as they're just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the track to the terminus — our API. The results then come back on the same path as they're just
```
